# IMU-Vibration-Detection-Compensation-Project
This is a GitHub repository for the real world, non-ideal IMU's vibration detection and compensation by using signal processing, machine learning and deep learning techniques in MATLAB for https://github.com/mathworks/MATLAB-Simulink-Challenge-Project-Hub/tree/main/projects/Vibration%20Detection%20and%20Rejection%20from%20IMU%20Data Project #231.

# Contributors
Buket ÖZBAY - ozbayb21@itu.edu.tr & Deniz ERDOĞAN - erdogand21@itu.edu.tr

# Aim of Project
Vibration signals can be caused by engines or environmental factors. Accelerometer and gyroscope data can be negatively impacted by vibration of the vehicle, which can in turn degrade the vehicle’s ability to navigate accurately. 
Therefore, systems that tolerate vibration are being developed. 
In this study, a working environment was created using MATLAB imuSensor, and datasets containing vibration signals were observed.
Signal processing techniques are utilized to create the artificial vibration signal and machine learning models were used to detect the vibration. 
With this research, it was aimed to have more data by multiplying the vibration data and thus to train the machine learning model for more situations. 
Detection of artificial or real vibration signals and damping of vibration are also carried out with machine learning techniques. 
Thus, it can contribute to the design of more reliable navigation systems.

# Steps of Study
1. Dataset examination and vibration analysis: Used dataset is examined and analyzed in terms of vibration with Fast Fourier Transformation (FFT).
2. Vibration data generation: New vibration data is generation with the help of signal processing techniques and comparison is made between the generated and original acceleration data.
3. Detection and classification of vibration: Generated data is classified by k-means clustering.
4. Vibration compensation: Vibration elements in the vibrating acceleration data is removed by deep learning techniques.

# Dataset
Kaggle Accelerometer Data Set for “Prediction of Motor Failure Time”

# 1. VIBRATION ANALYSIS
Time domain and frequency domain vibration analysis is done. Frequency domain analysis is crucial to catch the vibration signal:
X-Axis: Largely dominant at frequencies near zero (static or very low frequency vibration); no significant peaks are seen since x-axis is the axis of height. It behaves like a DC component. Therefore, this axis did not be taken into consideration.
Y-Axis: A pronounced peak around 15 Hz indicates a mechanical resonance or vibration source on that axis. This may mean that the system is vibrating more on that axis around 15 Hz.
Z-Axis: A small spike is noticeable at medium frequencies (10–15 Hz).

# 2. VIBRATION DATA GENERATION
Artificial vibration data is generated by using signal processing techniques. Frequency spectrum of this generated data is monitored with high amplitudes at some points of frequencies.

# 3. K-MEANS CLUSTRING
The k-means algorithm is an unsupervised ML technique that classifies the data into clusters with similar features by reducing L2 loss between mean of the cluster and the elements of this cluster. In this project, data is classified as vibrating and non-vibrating depending on their RMS values with K-means. The reason is that technique is preferred is its simplicity and ability to naturally split the data into two distinct groups.

# 4. VIBRATION COMPENSATION WITH DENOISING AUTOENCODER
Input Data:
Original data (x): Clean data
Partially corrupted data: Original data with added noise
Input x̃: Noisy input data given to the network

Encoder - gφ:
Part that compresses the input data to a lower dimensional representation

Bottleneck - z:
Compressed, low dimensional representation of the data

Decoder - fθ:
Part that returns the compressed representation to its original size

Output - x':
Reconstructed data
Ideally expected to be the same as the original data (x ≈ x')

# CONCLUSION AND EVALUATION
Major Findings:
Frequency Analysis: FFT analysis, can provide important information for machine health monitoring, structural analysis or vibration control.

Feature Extraction: The amplitude values and root mean square (RMS) values obtained from the frequency spectrum were used to distinguish between vibrating and non-vibrating states.

Classification: With the K-means algorithm, the data were classified into two main clusters and these clusters were labeled as vibrating and non-vibrating.
This study demonstrates that vibration and non-vibration states can be successfully classified using the frequency characteristics acceleration data obtained from IMU sensors. The K-means algorithm, as an unsupervised learning method, has proven to be an effective tool for such classification problems. Then, we obtained vibration data can be denoised by deep learning algorithm.

# FUTURE WORK
Data generation part is desired to be generated by Generative AI techniques instead of signal processing techniques.
